Spines Documentation - Intrusion Tolerance
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Spines version 5.0 adds new Intrusion Tolerant capabilities. Intrusion
Tolerance is the notion that a system as a whole should continue to work
correctly even if some portion of it is compromised (controlled by an
adversary). This is sometimes called Byzantine Fault Tolerance.  Spines now
looks for a configuration file (assumed to be at spines.conf, but the path can
be specified with the -c option). This file allows Intrusion Tolerance mode to
be turned on and off. If no configuration file is found, Spines will start with
default values, including Intrusion Tolerance mode being off. If this is the
case, the new protocols (below) will not be available. See the
example_spines.conf file included in the source code for more details.

If Intrusion Tolerance mode is on, only the network topology specified in the
configuration file will be honored. New nodes will not be allowed to join the
system and existing nodes will not be able to create new edges. Link protocols
that have not been hardened against a malicious neighbor are disabled.

The new Intrusion Tolerant Link protocol has been hardened against a malicious
neighbor and is used for Intrusion Tolerance mode. In this link, each packet
acknowledgement must provide evidence that the message was actually received.

Priority Messaging and Reliable Messaging are two new Intrusion Tolerant
dissemination methods available with Intrusion Tolerance mode, and only use the
Intrusion Tolerant Link to forward messages.

Priority Messaging uses a source-defined priority to allocate resources in a
source-fair manner across all active source nodes. This enables it to provide
timely messaging, even if some of the nodes in the network are compromised,
working against the system. This dissemination method can be used with K
node-disjoint paths, or with flooding on the overlay, to provide redundancy.

Reliable Messaging provides end-to-end reliable message delivery. It uses back
pressure all the way to the source to stop new messages from entering the
system until existing messages are delivered and allocated resources in a
flow-fair manner (across all flows for memory, and across active flows for
bandwidth). Sources provide signed end-to-end acknowledgements to clear
messages from buffers in the middle of the network. Reliable Messaging provides
eventual path delivery: even if the network is cut due to failures and
recoveries, the messages will still be delivered reliably. This dissemination
method can be used with K node-disjoint paths, or with flooding on the overlay,
to provide redundancy.

In order to provide message authentication and integrity, messages on the
Intrusion Tolerant Link are HMAC'd and messages sent via the Priority Messaging
and Reliable Messaging schemes are signed. We use OpenSSL for the cryptographic
functions, and the parameters for these functions are in the configuration file.

Files for cryptographic functions (e.g. public and private keys) are expected
to be in the keys/ folder if cryptographic methods are enabled. These files can
be generated using the gen_keys.sh script. Be sure to change the script to
match the correct number of nodes in the system. For security reasons, it is
advisable to generate the keys offline, then move the appropriate keys (one
private key and all public keys) to each node separately.

A new test program (sp_bflooder) is included in testprogs/. Its functionally
resembles sp_uflooder, but it supports the new protocols above. See the usage
for more details.
